---
title: The Science
author: Gavin Kelly
date: '2020-04-20'
slug: the-science
categories: [Science]
tags: [Science]
keywords:
  - Science
---
During the Covid-19 pandemic, it has become a mantra that politicians
are following the science. What could this mean, and is it an
unequivocally good thing for science and society?
<!--more-->

Firstly, I'm somewhat baffled by the term *the science*. Yes, there's
generally a scientific consensus on many things; and there's a thing
called the scientific process. The latter is what many of us are
currently involved in, applying a set of procedures to improve
understanding of something that is not yet completely understood. And
the scientific consensus is the sociological outcome of the scientific
process, which is subject to revision in the presence of compelling new
evidence when a further round of the scientic process is undertaken.

Using *the science* to answer questions that aren't purely scientific,
or even entirely well-formed, is cloaking a necessarily politcal
decision in order to protect the messenger from any adverse
effects. For instance, how is it possible to give a scientific answer
to when to stop lockdown, without giving any criterion of success
(pondering the (trolley
problem)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trolley_problem] for a moment
should quickly relieve one of the notion that there's an obvious
definition of success). The problem of balancing e.g. economic with
medical impact of such a decision is necessarily deepy embedded in how
that question is answered; the outcome is multi-dimensional. It's
possible that, contingent upon a lot of assumptions, a prediction
could be made of the different components of the outcome (political,
economic, medical, societal, ...). But even assuming the associated
uncertainties of these components be not prohibitively so large as to
render them meaningless, using *the science* to entirely justify a
decision is a disingenuous simplification of what is a complex
question.

There's a common fallacy that a question that is simple to state
demands, and is capable of, a simple answer. It is hard for the expert
to refute this hidden assumption without appearing to either dodge the
question or appear to be gatekeeping. Stating "I don't know, but I do
know that anyone claiming to know is probably wrong" isn't always
going to help, but is possibly honest. If the question is answerable
using our current knowledge, then giving a reply that includes all the
assumptions and quantifies the uncertainty is already optimisitic;
giving a reply when we have (known
unknowns)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/There_are_known_knowns] is
pre-judging the outcome of the scientific process - those gaps in our
knowledge can only really be filled with careful inference from
experimentation and observation.

I suspect what is frequently happening is that the views of a
scientist, or a group of scientists, is being taken into account, and
then through a process akin to Chinese Whispers any accompanying
context, subtleties or caveats are lost when it is turned into
policy. This is perhaps unavoidable, given the need to make decisions,
but greater public understanding of the scientific process and of
uncertainty would help. When we are caught in the rain when a forecast
said there was a 10% chance of rain, it is possible to feel let down -
only when we find out that 90% of people experienced no rain that day
(or that of the many times that forecaster said 10% chance of rain, it
didn't rain on approximately 90% of those occassions - see, even in
such a simple 'prediction' there is room for multiple interpretations)
are we justified in claiming the forecaster be wrong.


